Kerem B. Tekin 

linkedin.com/in/kerembtekin | keremtekin2000@gmail.com | (803) 477-1157


EDUCATION
University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 	 	Expected: Dec 2024 
B.S. in Aerospace Engineering & Minor in Mechanical Engineering
Organizations: Rocketry Club, AIAA, SAMPE

Midlands Technical College, Columbia, SC 	 
Associate in Science and Engineering 
Dean’s List 2x 

WORK EXPERIENCE
McNAIR Aerospace Center 	Columbia, SC 
Smart Manufacturing Researcher under Dr. Ramy Harik 	Feb 2023 – Jan 2024 
	•	Focused on integrating autonomous mobile robots within TRANE Technologies' operations to enhance operational efficiency and reduce manual labor.
	•	Assisted in the development and implementation of ML models for predictive maintenance.
	•	Utilized Plan Simulate to develop optimal path-finding algorithms, increasing robot lifetime and reducing maintenance costs.
	•	Participated in weekly research meetings to present findings and contribute to strategic planning.

Walmart Inc. 	Columbia, SC 
Electronic Sales Associate	Nov 2019 – Mar 2022 
	•	Managed registers, sold merchandise, and arranged product placement in the Electronics department.
	•	Provided exceptional customer service, assisting customers with product inquiries and purchases.

Senior Design Project	Dec 2022 – Jun 2023 
	•	Developed a booster rocket to launch a payload developed by a separate team to a specified altitude.
	•	Led a multi-month, multi-team collaboration, involving coordination with drone teams and experts.
	•	Engaged with industry experts and professors to address the novel challenges and optimize the design.

LEADERSHIP EXPERIENCE
USC Rocketry Club 	Columbia, SC 
President	August 2022 – Dec 2023 
	•	Secured funding for future projects from departments, external sources, and university-level resources.
	•	Organized and oversaw workshops and hands-on sessions to enhance members' skills in rocketry.
	•	Led the end-to-end process of designing, manufacturing, and launching student-made rockets.
	•	Coordinated with industry and alumni to provide mentorship and networking opportunities.

PUBLICATIONS & AWARDS
[2022] Dean’s Award for Excellence
[2023] McNair Junior Fellows Award
[2023] AIAA Conference Paper: "V-Tailed Transatlantic Business Jet" (https://lnkd.in/ghn42TMu)

EDUCATION
University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 	 	Expected: Dec 2024 
B.S. in Aerospace Engineering & Minor in Mechanical Engineering
Organizations: Rocketry Club, AIAA, SAMPE

Midlands Technical College, Columbia, SC 	 
Associate in Science and Engineering 
Dean’s List 2x 

SKILLS
Software	Siemens NX, AutoCAD, Creo, Ansys
Programming 	Python, MATLAB
Languages	English, Turkish
	
