© 2024 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or
future media, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works,
for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.

Continual Domain Randomization

arXiv:2403.12193v2 [cs.RO] 27 Aug 2024

Josip Josifovski1∗ , Sayantan Auddy2∗ , Mohammadhossein Malmir1 ,
Justus Piater2,4 , Alois Knoll1 and Nicolás Navarro-Guerrero3

Abstract— Domain Randomization (DR) is commonly used
for sim2real transfer of reinforcement learning (RL) policies
in robotics. Most DR approaches require a simulator with a
fixed set of tunable parameters from the start of the training,
from which the parameters are randomized simultaneously to
train a robust model for use in the real world. However, the
combined randomization of many parameters increases the task
difficulty and might result in sub-optimal policies. To address
this problem and to provide a more flexible training process,
we propose Continual Domain Randomization (CDR) for RL
that combines domain randomization with continual learning
to enable sequential training in simulation on a subset of
randomization parameters at a time. Starting from a model
trained in a non-randomized simulation where the task is easier
to solve, the model is trained on a sequence of randomizations,
and continual learning is employed to remember the effects of
previous randomizations. Our robotic reaching and grasping
tasks experiments show that the model trained in this fashion
learns effectively in simulation and performs robustly on the
real robot while matching or outperforming baselines that
employ combined randomization or sequential randomization
without continual learning. Our code and videos are available
at https://continual-dr.github.io/.
Index Terms— Domain randomization, sim2real transfer,
continual reinforcement learning, robotic manipulation

I. I NTRODUCTION
Deep reinforcement learning (DRL) in robotics research
relies heavily on simulated environments, mainly because of
the sample inefficiency of DRL algorithms and the absence
of safe exploration guarantees, which make it impractical
to train such algorithms on physical robots directly. While
simulations provide virtually unlimited training data and
eliminate safety concerns during training, their approximative nature can significantly degrade the model’s performance
on the real system in sim2real transfer [1] – a phenomenon
known as the reality gap.
To bridge the reality gap, one can try to attain zeroshot sim2real transfer by crafting an accurate simulation and
perfectly mimicking the behavior of the real system [1]. Unfortunately, even for elementary systems, simulating reality
with sufficient precision is rarely possible. Alternatively, a
simulation-trained DRL model can be finetuned on the target
to improve performance. This domain adaptation approach
updates the policy learned in simulation and usually leads to
1 School of Computation Information and Technology, Technical University of Munich, Germany.
2 Department of Computer Science, University of Innsbruck, Austria.
3 L3S Research Center, Leibniz Universität Hannover, Germany.
4 Digital Science Center (DiSC), University of Innsbruck, Austria.
∗ Equal contribution
Sayantan Auddy is supported by a doctoral scholarship granted by the
University of Innsbruck, Vice-Rectorate for Research.

improved performance. However, it makes the policy systemspecific and requires at least some real-world training, which
can be unsafe and time-consuming [2].
Due to the impracticality of developing perfect simulations
and the limitations of domain adaptation, recent works on
domain randomization [3] rely on the randomization of
simulation parameters. Here, instead of accurately simulating
every parameter of the real system, the relevant simulation
parameters are randomized to cover the difference between
the real world and simulation. However, it can be challenging
to precisely identify all the essential randomization parameters at the start. Moreover, the excessive randomization of
many parameters jointly increases the task complexity and
the agent’s uncertainty, making it difficult to find a good
policy in simulation [4].
To address these limitations, we propose Continual Domain Randomization (CDR), which combines domain randomization [3] with continual learning [5] (CL) for sim2real
transfer. Viewing domain randomization as a CL problem
provides greater flexibility in the initial choice of the randomization parameters. Additionally, randomizing a subset
of all parameters at a time reduces the risks of excessive
randomization. In CDR, we start with an agent trained in
an idealized simulation (with all randomizations disabled)
and successively train the agent in differently randomized
simulations. We treat each randomization as a separate CL
task and enable the DRL agent to continually train under
each randomization without catastrophically forgetting [5]
the knowledge gained from previous training runs (i.e.,
past tasks). We implement an offline and an online version
of CDR by combining the Proximal Policy Optimization
(PPO) [6] algorithm with the regularization-based CL algorithm Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC) [7] and its online
variant [8]. Nevertheless, CDR is a general strategy that can
be implemented with other DRL or CL algorithms.
We perform experiments for sim2real transfer of two
different robotics tasks, reaching and grasping, and compare
the real-world performance of policies learned using CDR
against finetuning, full-randomization, and the ideal model
trained without randomization. Our results show that CDR
can match or outperform baselines that jointly randomize
all parameters throughout the training process. At the same
time, it is more stable and less sensitive to the order of randomizations than sequential baselines like finetuning, which
only optimizes the policy for the newest randomization and
ignores previous ones. These results highlight the potential of
CDR as a general and flexible framework for helping bridge
the reality gap in DRL-based robotics.

II. R ELATED W ORK
Even though there are some cases of sim2real transfer
where measuring and precisely simulating all relevant parameters of the real system may be possible [9], [10], due
to wear and tear in the robot’s hardware or changes in
external conditions like temperature or humidity, they can
vary significantly [1]. Intuitively, providing some degree of
variability in the simulator parameters and training a model
that can deal with a range of parameter values would lead
to a more robust sim2real transfer [11]. For this reason,
domain randomization (DR) [3], [12]–[18] has become a
widely used sim2real technique. However, inappropriate and
excessive randomization can increase the uncertainty of the
system and the difficulty of solving the task in simulation,
leading to sub-optimal policies and longer training times [4].
One approach to circumvent those problems is automatic
domain randomization [14]. Here, the randomization increases progressively as the policy under the current randomization improves the performance. In contrast, active
domain randomization [15] starts from wide randomization
ranges and learns the most informative ranges for training
a robust policy. While the previous approaches assume that
only simulated data is available, data from the real system
can be used in offline fashion [17], [19] to find suitable
parameter distributions, or to identify which parameters are
relevant for sim2real transfer through causal discovery [18].
Continual learning (CL) algorithms enable knowledge
accumulation from a sequence of tasks without catastrophic
forgetting [5]. CL has traditionally targeted supervised learning scenarios using static datasets or reinforcement learning
problems with discrete actions [7], [8]. More recently, CL
has been applied to more challenging scenarios such as
robot learning, both in simulation [20] as well as in the real
world [21], [22]. Continual reinforcement learning (CRL)
in continuous action and observation spaces [23] has also
emerged as a popular means of training robots to learn multiple tasks. CRL scenarios can be of different types [23]: (i) the
state transition and action space for different tasks remain
the same, but the reward function changes (the agent needs
to perform fundamentally different actions such as pushing,
reaching, etc., for each task) [24]; (ii) the state transition
function changes, but the reward function and action space
remain the same. Here, the environment dynamics change,
but the ultimate goal of the agent remains the same [25]. The
sim2real scenario belongs to the latter.
Progressive networks [26] have also been used for continual sim2real transfer [27]. For instance, as shown by
Rusu et al., [27], an initial neural network can be trained in
simulation to solve a task, and a new network, with lateral
connections to the previous network for feature reusing, is
instantiated and trained on the real robot. Another approach
used for sim2real transfer is Policy distillation [28]. For
instance, Traoré et al., [29] trained a separate policy and
generated a dataset of observation-action pairs for each task
in simulation. The datasets are then used in a supervised
learning fashion to train a single model that can solve the

tasks in the real environment.
Unlike other domain randomization approaches, in CDR
no fixed set of randomization parameters during training is
assumed – the model can train on a subset of randomization parameters at a time and adapt to new randomization
parameters later. This is achieved by combining sequential
randomization with continual learning, which retains the
effects of previous randomizations and avoids overfitting to
the last set of parameters. Unlike other continual sim2real
approaches, CDR uses a single neural network trained across
all tasks. Additionally, the online CDR variant avoids the
linear increase in memory for keeping a separate dataset
or network parameters per task. Finally, CDR can easily be
combined with methods like automated [14] or active [15]
DR to find suitable ranges for the subset of randomization
parameters within a single training run in the sequence.
III. M ETHODOLOGY
A. Problem Description
Let M = (S, A, P, R, S0 , γ, T ) define a Markov Decision
Process (MDP) where S denotes the state space, A is
the action space, P (st+1 ∈ S|st ∈ S, at ∈ A) is the
state transition probability, R is the reward function, S0
defines an initial state distribution, γ is the reward discount
factor and T defines the finite horizon. The objective of
reinforcement learning is to find the parameters θ for a
parameterized
PTpolicy πθ (at |st ) to maximize the expected
return Eπθ [ t=0 γ t R(st , at )] where s0 ∼ S0 , st+1 ∼ P
and at ∼ πθ (at |st ). Let Φ denote a real system with
unknown dynamics, and E = {ϵ1 , · · · , ϵn } denote the set
of all randomization parameters of a simulator Σ of Φ. The
goal is to optimize θ using Σ such that it maximizes the
expected return on Φ (zero-shot sim2real transfer).
B. Continual Domain Randomization
In our suggested approach, Continual Domain Randomization (CDR), the policy parameters θ = θ̃ are initialized
and optimized in an idealized simulation Ψ∅ (with all randomizations disabled). Afterward, we sequentially optimize
the resulting θ with CL on a sequence of simulations where
a subset of randomization parameters is enabled each time,
Ψ∅

Ψϵ

Ψϵ

1
n
as shown in Fig. 1: θ̃ −−→ θ∅ −−→
θ1 · · · −−→
θn .

CDR-λ: combines the PPO [6] algorithm with the popular
regularization-based CL algorithm Elastic Weight Consolidation (EWC) [7], λ denotes the regularization process
with EWC. EWC is an approximate Bayesian method that
quantifies the importance of neural network parameters for
remembering previous knowledge using the empirical Fisher
information matrix (FIM). The FIM is used to estimate the
posterior distribution over the network parameters, approximating it as a multivariate Gaussian centered around the
maximum a posteriori (MAP) estimate. The diagonal of
the covariance matrix is then used to determine parameter
importance. The loss function for learning task C after tasks
A and B is:
λA
λB
∗ 2
∗ 2
||θ − θB
||FB +
||θ − θA
||FA (1)
L(θ) = LC (θ) +
2
2

Training in simulation

Evaluation in the real world

Ideal
Finetuning

θ∅

θ1

θ2

θn

θ1

θ2

θn

θ1

θ2

θn

Ψ∅
CDR-λ
Randomized
CDR-Oλ

Ψε1

Ψε2

Ψεn

Fig. 1. Overview of our proposed CDR approach. CDR-λ (blue arrow) uses a set of network snapshots and Fisher matrices (one for each past task) for
continual learning, while CDR-Oλ (green arrow) uses only a single parameter snapshot and Fisher matrix. Other baselines are shown with gray arrows.
Each shape (□, #, · · · , △) represents a unique randomization parameter set. Disabled and enabled sets are indicated with gray and blue respectively.

where LC is the task-specific loss for task C, λA and λB are
∗
∗
the regularization constants, θA
and θB
are the saved MAP
parameters after learning tasks A and task B respectively,
and FA and FB are the diagonal Fisher information matrices
for the first two tasks. In this paper, we adapt PPO for CL by
regularizing the parameters of only the actor network with
EWC. After learning each task, we roll out trajectories of the
PPO agent trained on the most recent environment and store
these in a replay buffer. After that, we compute the (diagonal)
empirical Fisher information for the latest task using the
squared gradients of the log-likelihoods of the action [30]
predicted by the PPO policy:
n
1X
F (θ) =
∇θ log pθ (yi |xi )∇θ log pθ (yi |xi )T (2)
n i
here, n denotes the number of samples in the replay buffer,
xi and yi denote the input and output of the policy network,
and θ denotes the parameters of the policy network. Since the
critic does not contribute to the log-likelihood computation,
the parameters of the critic are not regularized. In contrast to
previous implementations of PPO and EWC [31], but similar
to online-EWC [8], we normalize the elements of F to be
in the range [0.0,1.0] after each task. This normalization
decouples the regularization constant λ from the arbitrary
scaling of the Fisher information of individual tasks and
allows us to use of a single value of λ for all tasks.
A disadvantage of regular EWC is that for each randomization (task), a separate snapshot of the actor network
parameters and the corresponding empirical diagonal Fisher
information needs to be saved. This results in the undesired linear scaling of storage requirements. To counter this,
we suggest combining PPO with online-EWC [8] creating
CDR-Oλ. After learning a task, a replay buffer is filled, and
the empirical Fisher information is computed with Eq. 2.
Thus, instead of maintaining a separate copy of the network
and Fisher information for each task, only one copy of the
network after the most recent task is kept, and the network
is updated using
λ
∗
||2γFi−1
Li (θ) = L̃i (θ) + ||θ − θi−1
∗
2

(3)

where Li (θ) is the overall loss for the current task, L̃i (θ)
∗
is the snapshot of the
is the task-specific PPO loss, θi−1
∗
network after the previous task, and Fi−1
is the online Fisher
∗
information after the previous task. Fi−1
and the Fisher
information of the current task Fi are used to update the
online Fisher information Fi∗ using a hyperparameter γ:
∗
Fi∗ = γFi−1
+ Fi

(4)

We again normalize Fi to be in the range [0.0,1.0] to avoid
any arbitrary scaling. Similar to CDR-λ, we only regularize
the PPO actor network for CDR-Oλ.
C. Baselines
We implement multiple baselines [4] with PPO [6]
(Fig. 1):
(i) Ideal: Training is conducted in the ideal simulation
environment without any randomization.
(ii) Finetuning: The model trained in the ideal simulation
is used as a starting point and then successively finetuned on each of the randomization parameters, one at
a time, without any continual learning.
(iii) Randomized: The model is trained by activating all the
randomization parameters together at the same time.
IV. E XPERIMENT S ETUP
For the experiments, we consider the reach-andbalance [4] task with a 2-joint-controlled robotic arm, and
a robotic grasping task with a kinematically redundant, 7joint-controlled arm and a three-fingered gripper [32]. Both
tasks are defined in continuous state and action spaces,
and the RL agent exercises fine-grained direct control over
the robot’s joint velocities. We intentionally use joint space
control, because it requires minimal information about the
real system’s dynamics [33]. Moreover, in this case the
agents are supposed to learn to compensate for dynamic effects, e.g., inertial forces [33] through randomization, which
is particularly important and part of our sim2real transfer
analysis.

A. Reacher Task

Reacher
(sim)

The reacher task is defined as:
st = [∆xt , ∆yt , ∆zt , q1 , q2 ] ∈ R5

(5)

at = [q̇1′ , q̇2′ ] ∈ R2

(6)

(
−dt
rt =
−dt × (T − t)

if C is false
∈R
otherwise

Fig. 2.

Reacher
(real)

Grasper
(sim)

Grasper
(real)

The simulated and real environments for reaching and grasping.

(7)
C. Robot Platform

where st is the agent’s state at timestep t, ∆x, ∆y and
∆z are the distances between the end-effector and the target
along the corresponding coordinate axes, and qi are the joint
positions. at is the set of joint velocities the agent commands
at timestep t. The reward rt at each timestep is defined as
the negative Euclidean distance dt between the end-effector
and the target, unless the robot collides with the floor or
reaches joint limits, in which case the terminal condition
C becomes true, the episode terminates and the reward is
the negative distance at that timestep multiplied with the
remaining timesteps to the maximal episode length T .

The simulated and real-world environments are shown in
Fig. 2. We use the Unity-based platform introduced in [25]
for the simulation. For both reacher and grasper, we use the
KUKA LBR iiwa 14 robotic manipulator [34], and for the
grasping task we use the 3-Finger Adaptive Robotic Gripper
(3F model) by Robotiq in pinch mode, relying on the gripper
parameters and meshes from the URDF data provided by
the ROS-Industrial [35] package. The real robot is controlled
with the IIWA stack [36] via Robot Operating System (ROS)
[37]. The box used for the grasping experiments is a cube
with a side of 50mm.

B. Grasper Task

D. Training Procedure

st = [∆xt , ∆yt , ∆zt , q1 , q2 , q3 , q4 , q5 , q6 , q7 ,
∆f xt , ∆f y t , ∆f z t , ∆uxt , ∆uy t , ∆uz t ] ∈ R16

(8)

at = [q̇1′ , q̇2′ , q̇3′ , q̇4′ , q̇5′ , q̇6′ , q̇7′ ] ∈ R7

(9)

(
rt =

−dpt − 0.5 × dut − c
−dpt − 0.5 × dut − c + g

if t < T
∈R
if t = T

(10)

where st is the state of the agent at timestep t, ∆xp , ∆yp
and ∆zp are the distances between the end-effector and
the center of the object along the corresponding coordinate
axes, and q1−7 are the joint positions. ∆f x, ∆f y, ∆f z
are the distances between the forward unit direction vector
of the object and the forward unit direction vector of the
end-effector along each axis, and ∆ux, ∆uy, ∆uz are the
distances between the up unit direction vector of the plane
on which the object is placed and the up unit direction
vector of the end-effector along each axis. at is the set of
joint velocities the agent commands at time t. Each episode
has a fixed duration T . If a collision occurs or the robot
reaches joint limits during the episode, zero velocities are
commanded until the episode ends. At the end of the episode,
if there were no collisions and the joint limits were not
reached, the robot stops moving and the gripper closes in
an attempt to grasp the object. The reward at timestep t
is defined in terms of the negative Euclidean distance dpt
between the end-effector and the center of the object, the
negative Euclidean distance dut between the up unit vectors
of the gripper and the floor, and a penalty coefficient c that
is 0 by default and 1 if there is a collision or joint limits
are reached during the episode. At the end of the episode, if
the grasping attempt was successful, the term g is set to 10,
otherwise it is 0.

We use three randomisation parameters commonly used
in the literature [4], [13]: (i) Latency L: random delay in
observing the current state; (ii) Torque T : the joint stiffness
and damping coefficients are randomized, resulting in a
randomized torque for reaching the commanded velocity;
and (iii) Noise N : noise drawn from a uniform distribution
is randomly incorporated to simulate sensor inaccuracies.
The implementation is identical to [4] and the ranges of the
randomization parameters are provided in Tab. I.
The efficacy of sim2real transfer under sequential training
strategies like finetuning or CDR may be influenced by the
ordering of randomization parameters, as each parameter can
have varying effects on the transfer process [4]. Instead of
unnecessarily testing all possible permutations of L, N , and
T , we empirically evaluate the importance of each parameter
for sim2real transfer on the reaching task to determine the
best and worst case ordering scenario. In the best scenario,
the parameter that leads to the best sim2real transfer is at the
end of the training sequence, while in the worst case scenario,
it is at the beginning. For the empirical evaluation, we perform training on a single-parameter randomized simulation
from scratch and evaluate the models in ideal simulation and
on the real system. The results from 5 independent seeds for

-100
Sim

Real

-120
Reward

The grasping task is defined as:

-140
-160
-180
NONE

T

L
Randomization

N

ALL

Fig. 3. Effects of different randomization parameters on sim2real transfer
for the reaching task.

TABLE I
T RAINING HYPERPARAMETERS .
Parameter (PPO)

Value

Parameter

sim2real gap. We report multiple metrics detailed in Tab. II,
both in simulation and the real system.
Value

stiff: [101 , 103 ]
Bias-var tradeoff (λ)
0.95
Torque (T )
damp: [101 , 103 ]
Disc. factor (γ)
0.99
Latency (L)
[0, 1] sec
Learning rate (α)
25 × 10−5 Noise (N )
[0, 10] %
Val. fun. coeff. (c1 )
0.5
EWC reg. const. λ
5 × 103
Ent. coeff. (c2 )
0.0
EWC buffer limit
100
Clip range (ϵ)
0.1
EWC replay batch
32
Epochs
10
EWC replay samples
5000
Mini-batches
32
online-EWC γ
0.95

each parameter, as well as the baselines where no parameter
or all parameters are randomized, are presented in Fig. 3.
Based on the results, we define T LN and N LT orderings
for the sequential training strategies in the experiments.
We extend the PPO [6] implementation in StableBaselines3 [38] to implement the methods described in Sec. III.
We use the default network architecture (2-layer MLP, 64
units/layer, tanh activations). Due to the different state and
action space dimensions, the network for grasper is much
larger than that for reacher. We use the same PPO-specific
hyperparameters as in [4]. For the EWC hyperparameters,
we start from literature-recommended values [7] and adjust
them empirically. All hyperparameters are listed in Tab. I.
For reacher, we use an episode length of 500 timesteps,
with a timestep duration of 20ms (50Hz control frequency),
for a total simulated time of 10s per episode. The maximal
allowed joint speed is 20 deg/sec. For grasper, due to safety
concerns on the real system, we reduce the maximum joint
speed to 10 deg/sec, adapt the timestep duration to 50ms
(20Hz control frequency), and the episode length to 200
timesteps, for the same total simulated time per episode
of 10s. Under the ideal training strategy, the simulator has
all randomization parameters disabled throughout the entire
training duration, i.e., there is no latency or noise, and
the commanded joint velocities are reached instantaneously.
Under the fully randomized strategy, all randomization parameters are simultaneously enabled. We start with a model
pre-trained in ideal simulation for the CDR and finetuning
strategies. Then, we train them sequentially on each of the
N , L, and T -only randomized simulations for equal duration.
For the reaching task, the total training duration is 4 × 106
timesteps, while for the grasping task it is 10×106 timesteps
due to the higher task complexity and a larger number of
trainable parameters.
E. Evaluation Procedure and Metrics
While the training takes place only in simulation, evaluation takes place both in simulation (ideal setting) and on
the real robot, see Fig. 2. In both cases, the same episode
duration, control frequency, robot’s starting configuration,
maximal joint speeds, joint limits, and object/target positions
per task are used, leading to identical conditions in the
simulation and the real system, such that any difference in
performance of the evaluated model can be attributed to the

TABLE II
E VALUATION METRICS .
Cumulative episodic reward (rep ): The sum of the rewards collected
by the agent during an evaluation rollout of T steps.
rep =

T
X

rt

(11)

t=0

Continuity cost (C) [39]: A measure of the smoothness of motion.
"
 #
at+1 − at 2
C = 100 × Et
(12)
∆a
max
where at+1 and at are consecutive actions, and ∆a
max denotes the
maximum difference between consecutive actions during the evaluation
rollout. C ranges between 0 (constant actions) and 100 (each consecutive
action reaches opposing limits in the action space). Lower values denote
a smoother robot motion and are desirable in the real system.
Distance to the target (dtgt ): The average Euclidean distance of the
center of the robot’s end-effector pt to the target ptgt in the second half
of the episode, when it is expected that the target is already reached.
This is related to its stabilization strength [40], i.e., the ability to balance
and avoid jittering motions around the target once it is reached. Lower
values denote better performance.
dtgt =

t=T
2 X
||pt − ptgt ||2
T

(13)

t=T /2

Grasping success (G): Measures the percentage of successful grasps
during multiple evaluation rollouts. Values range from 0 to 1, where
one means that every grasp attempt was successful.

V. E XPERIMENT R ESULTS
A. Reacher
The training progress of agents trained under different
strategies and randomization orders to solve the reaching task
is presented in Fig. 4. Each model is trained ten times with
independent seeds and their performance throughout training
is evaluated in non-randomized simulation. The reaching
task is relatively easy to solve, especially in the absence
of randomizations, which is why it takes less time for the
Ideal baseline to converge w.r.t. the Ramdomized one. For the
sequentially trained models the ordering of the randomization
parameters greatly affects the extent to which the policy
can be improved. The policy improves faster when torque
randomization is first (T LN ) due to the lower uncertainty in
the agent’s state compared to the sequence starting with noise
randomization (N LT ). Finetuning adapts much faster than
the CL models (CDR-λ, CDR-Oλ) and reaches performance
in simulation similar to the Ideal model. Among the CL
models, CDR-λ changes more slowly and reaches a lower
performance in simulation compared to CDR-Oλ since there
is a separate regularization for each randomization parameter
under EWC training, which reduces the ability of the policy
to change. CDR-Oλ adapts faster and converges to a similar
performance as the fully-randomized models.
The evaluation results in a non-randomized simulation and
on the real system for each randomization strategy for the

Max reward=-6.35

Max reward=-118.98

−20

−300

Reward

Reward

−200

−400

−140
−160

−500
−600
0.0

−120

Reward

−100

3.0
Min reward=-600.35

0.5

1.0

Ideal
Randomized

3.2
3.5
3.8
Timesteps (×106 )

1.5
2.0
2.5
Timesteps (×106 )

Strategy
CDR-Oλ
CDR-λ

3.0

Order
NA
TLN

Finetuning

−60
−80

4.0

3.5

−40

−100
4.0

Min reward=-108.03

0.0

NLT

2.0

Ideal
Randomized

4.0
6.0
Timesteps (×106 )
Strategy
CDR-λ
CDR-Oλ

8.0

Finetuning

10.0

Order
NA
TLN

NLT

Fig. 4. Training progress for the reaching task. Finetuing, CDR-λ and
CDR-Oλ start from the Ideal model at 106 timesteps, and are sequentially
trained on each randomization for 106 steps, shown by vertical dotted lines.
The max reward is the best reward achieved by any agent, and the min
reward is the one achieved by an agent that executes random actions.

Fig. 5.
Training progress for the grasping task. Finetuning, CDR-λ
and CDR-Oλ start from the Ideal model at 4 × 106 timesteps, and are
sequentially trained on each randomization for 2×106 steps (vertical dotted
lines). The max reward is the best reward achieved by any agent, and the
min reward is the one achieved by an agent that executes random actions.

TABLE III
R EACHER EVALUATION IN SIMULATION AND REALITY. M ETRICS ARE
E PISODIC REWARD rep , DIST. TO TARGET dtgt , AND CONTINUITY COST
C.

TABLE IV
G RASPER EVALUATION IN SIMULATION AND REALITY. M ETRICS ARE
E PISODIC REWARD rep , CONTINUITY COST C, AND GRASPING SUCCESS
G.

rep ↑
Strategy
CDR-λ (NLT)
CDR-λ (TLN)
CDR-Oλ (NLT)
CDR-Oλ (TLN)
Finetuning (NLT)
Finetuning (TLN)
Ideal
Randomized

Sim

Real

-140.59±15.21
-140.37±15.15
-128.82±4.88
-130.97±4.26
-119.57±0.29
-121.86±1.09
-119.27±0.38
-129.16±1.94

-157.24±17.23
-157.72±18.59
-143.88±4.82
-146.95±4.18
-197.78±7.23
-196.75±8.24
-208.46±2.17
-146.52±3.11

dtgt ↓
Sim
Real

Sim

C↓
Real

0.06
0.06
0.02
0.03
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.02

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.00
0.01
0.00

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.16
0.11
0.30
0.00

0.07
0.07
0.02
0.03
0.19
0.18
0.20
0.02

reaching task at the end of training are presented in Tab. III.
The Ideal model performs best in simulation. However, it
overfits to the simulation, and this leads to poor transfer
to the real system, resulting in lower rewards (rep ), high
continuity cost (C), and unstable jittering motions around
the target which results in high average distance to the
target (dtgt ). Randomized has lower rewards in simulation
but achieves very good sim2real transfer, leading to higher
rewards, low continuity cost, and lowest distance to target
on the real system. The CDR models also achieve very good
sim2real transfer and perform comparably to or better than
the fully Randomized baseline. Due to the stronger EWC
regularization during training, CDR-λ reaches lower rewards
and higher distance to target w.r.t. the CDR-Oλ strategy,
while it has comparable continuity cost to CDR-Oλ. Overall,
CDR-Oλ achieves the best rewards on the real system and
has distance and continuity cost values similar to the fully
Randomized baseline. Finetuning performs comparably to
Ideal in simulation but better on the real system. However,
due to the lack of any regularization, it finds over-confident
policies in simulation, leading to much worse sim2real
transfer than the CDR strategies. The qualitative differences
in performance between the different strategies are also
noticeable in the supplementary video.
B. Grasper
The results of the training progress of the different strategies for the grasping task evaluated in the non-randomized

rep ↑
Strategy
CDR-λ (NLT)
CDR-λ (TLN)
CDR-Oλ (NLT)
CDR-Oλ (TLN)
Finetuning (NLT)
Finetuning (TLN)
Ideal
Randomized

Sim

Real

Sim

C↓
Real

Sim

G↑
Real

-25.84±15.10
-27.63±20.25
-12.74±6.34
-44.81±32.47
-12.96±5.99
-42.88±35.37
-12.43±7.69
-28.42±6.00

-24.27±7.96
-23.25±6.89
-22.78±21.97
-23.61±6.11
-14.99±5.56
-27.24±15.30
-32.90±41.40
-25.89±7.28

0.06
0.08
0.05
0.08
0.07
0.08
0.06
0.04

0.15
0.11
0.12
0.09
0.09
0.02
0.45
0.01

0.40
0.40
0.78
0.23
0.59
0.33
0.77
0.20

0.20
0.20
0.60
0.20
0.40
0.40
0.60
0.40

simulation are presented in Fig. 5. Each experiment is
repeated five times with independent seeds. Compared to
reaching, the grasping task is more challenging to solve due
to the larger model sizes, the interaction with the object, and
the high precision needed for successful grasping.
With the Ideal model, grasping the object and achieving
a high reward is easier, while with the fully Randomized
model, it is more difficult due to the high uncertainty of
the agent’s state. Among the sequential training strategies, it
can be seen that the task is significantly more challenging
to solve when the noise randomization N is encountered
in the T LN or N LT sequences. The policy found at the
previous randomization step significantly changes to adapt
to the noise-randomized simulation. Overall, Finetuning has
higher deviations during training, while the deviations are
lower and more stable throughout training for the CDR
strategies, with CDR-λ being more consistent in comparison
to CDR-Oλ. This is likely due to the separate regularization
for each randomization parameter.
The evaluation results for grasping in ideal simulation and
the real world after training in the simulation are presented
in Tab. IV. Similar to the reaching task, Ideal achieves high
reward in simulation but achieves low average reward and
high continuity cost (unsafe jittering behavior, see supplementary video) on the real system, even though the object
is grasped in most runs. Randomized has moderate success
in finding a good policy in simulation and has the lowest
grasp success in non-randomized simulation. However, it has

good sim2real transfer and achieves the lowest continuity
cost. From the sequential strategies, we notice that they are
sensitive to the ordering and achieve higher success rates
but also higher continuity cost when torque is randomized
last in the sequence (N LT ), and lower continuity cost but
also lower grasp success when noise is at the end of the
sequence (T LN ). If we look at the rewards on the real
system, Finetuning deviates significantly and, depending on
the sequence, can achieve the best or worst reward from
any model that involves randomization, with a difference of
about 12%. On the other hand, the CDR models are less
susceptible to the ordering of randomization, as they achieve
similar rewards regardless of the sequence. Moreover, the
rewards of the CDR models lie within the range of the best
and worst Finetuning strategy and are better than the reward
of the Randomized strategy.
C. Effect of Continual Learning Regularization Strength
In the context of regularization-based CL methods used
to implement CDR, the regularization strength λ plays a
key role. A very low value makes the CDR models behave
like Finetuning, while a very high value makes it difficult
to adapt to new randomizations after being initially trained
in ideal simulation. Taking this into account, in our main
experiments we have used a value for λ solely based on
empirical evaluation in simulation in order to maintain the
zero-shot sim2real condition. Here, we perform additional
experiments to provide better intuition on a suitable range
for λ.
For this study, we employ the same training procedure as
in the reaching experiment in Sec. V-A. We use the same
hyperparameters (Tab. I) and only change the value of the
EWC λ parameter, testing a range of different values of λ =
x×10y with x ∈ {1, 5} and y ∈ {0, · · · , 4}. We train models
of CDR-λ and CDR-Oλ in the ideal simulation followed
by two different randomization sequences T LN and N LT .
We repeated them three times with independent seeds. The
evaluation results of the models in the ideal simulation and
on the real system are shown in Fig. 6.
CDR models perform well in simulation for lower values of λ. However, they become sensitive to the order of
randomizations and transfer poorly to the real system. On
the other hand, higher values of λ prevent changes to the
model pre-trained on non-randomized simulation used as a
Simulation

Reality

rep ↑

−150
Strategy
CDR-λ
CDR-Oλ

−200

dtgt ↓

0.2

Order
TLN
NLT

0.0

C↓

0.1

0.0

101

103
EWC λ

101

103
EWC λ

Fig. 6.
Effect of the EWC regularization constant λ on episodic reward (rep ), distance to target (dtgt ) and continuity cost (C) for sim2real
transfer.

starting point and perform poorly both in simulation and on
the real system. In this case, the continuity cost on the real
system is low because the agent performs slow moves toward
the target but does not learn to balance and overshoots the
target. The middle ranges of λ perform reasonably well in
simulation and give the best results on the real system while
being relatively robust to the order of randomizations.
VI. D ISCUSSION AND C ONCLUSION
In general, full randomization of many parameters simultaneously makes the task more difficult [4], [14], [15], and
our experiments show that it takes longer for the models to
converge under this setting. Sequential randomization starting from a model pre-trained on non-randomized simulation
offers a middle ground between no randomization and full
randomization. However, the ordering of the randomizations can affect sim2real transfer. Unfortunately, in zero-shot
transfer (without testing on the target system), the effect
of each randomization parameter cannot be known with
certainty. This can be detrimental since common sequential
randomization strategies overfit to the latest randomization
they were trained on.
CDR is less susceptible to the order of randomizations
and can transfer the effects of earlier randomizations in
the sequence to the final model. This can be done either
explicitly with CDR-λ where the transfer comes at the price
of linear increase of the memory, or implicitly with CDR-Oλ
where memory does not increase but the regularization effect
for continual learning is weaker. This paper uses CDR
for zero-shot sim2real transfer. However, CDR can also be
adapted to provide more flexible domain adaptation behavior
by viewing the real system as the final randomization in the
training sequence. EWC-λ can be set to 0 so that the policy
is finetuned to the real system dynamics or to values greater
than 0 in cases where the system parameters can vary over
time due to wear and tear or external conditions and the
policy needs to stay more general.
A limitation of our current training approach on one
randomization at a time is that we factorize the space of
randomization parameters. The complex interactions between
separate randomizations in the sequence may not be captured, which may lead to sub-optimal solutions. A possible
remedy for this is to define the randomization tasks as sets of
different and possibly intersecting groups of randomization
parameters [41]. Furthermore, this paper does not address
how to define the ranges for the randomization parameters.
Excessive randomization is possible even when a single
parameter is randomized at a time, e.g., 10% noise randomization translates to ± 200mm uncertainty of the box’s
position and makes the grasping task challenging to solve,
leading to poor grasp success on the real system. To address
this issue, CDR could be combined with automated domain
randomization [14] or active domain randomization [15] to
find suitable ranges for each randomization parameter.
In summary, CDR provides a flexible framework for zeroshot sim2real transfer that does not require all randomization
parameters to be defined or implemented ahead of time. It

enables randomization parameter decoupling and continual
model adaptation on new randomizations if required. In
future work, we want to address the limitations mentioned
above, as well as to implement CDR with other RL and
regularization-based CL approaches and apply it in the
context of vision-based domain randomization.
R EFERENCES
[1] W. Zhao, J. P. Queralta, and T. Westerlund, “Sim-to-Real Transfer
in Deep Reinforcement Learning for Robotics: A Survey,” in IEEE
Symposium Series on Computational Intelligence (SSCI), Canberra,
ACT, Australia, Dec. 2020, pp. 737–744.
[2] G. Dulac-Arnold, N. Levine, D. J. Mankowitz, J. Li, C. Paduraru,
S. Gowal, and T. Hester, “Challenges of Real-World Reinforcement
Learning: Definitions, Benchmarks and Analysis,” Machine Learning,
vol. 110, no. 9, pp. 2419–2468, 2021.
[3] J. Tobin, R. Fong, A. Ray, J. Schneider, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel,
“Domain Randomization for Transferring Deep Neural Networks from
Simulation to the Real World,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2017, pp. 23–30.
[4] J. Josifovski, M. Malmir, N. Klarmann, B. L. Zagar, N. NavarroGuerrero, and A. Knoll, “Analysis of Randomization Effects on
Sim2Real Transfer in Reinforcement Learning for Robotic Manipulation Tasks,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS). Kyoto, Japan: IEEE, Oct. 2022, pp.
10 193–10 200.
[5] G. I. Parisi, R. Kemker, J. L. Part, C. Kanan, and S. Wermter,
“Continual Lifelong Learning with Neural Networks: A Review,”
Neural Networks, vol. 113, pp. 54–71, May 2019.
[6] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov,
“Proximal Policy Optimization Algorithms, Tech. Rep. arXiv:
1707.06347, July 2017.
[7] J. Kirkpatrick, R. Pascanu, N. Rabinowitz, J. Veness, G. Desjardins,
A. A. Rusu, K. Milan, J. Quan, T. Ramalho, A. Grabska-Barwinska,
D. Hassabis, C. Clopath, D. Kumaran, and R. Hadsell, “Overcoming
Catastrophic Forgetting in Neural Networks,” Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, vol. 114, no. 13, pp. 3521–3526, 2017.
[8] J. Schwarz, W. Czarnecki, J. Luketina, A. Grabska-Barwinska, Y. W.
Teh, R. Pascanu, and R. Hadsell, “Progress & Compress: A Scalable
Framework for Continual Learning,” in International Conference on
Machine Learning (ICML), vol. 80. PMLR, 2018, pp. 4528–4537.
[9] S. James and E. Johns, “3D Simulation for Robot Arm Control with
Deep Q-Learning,” in NIPS Workshop: Deep Learning for Action and
Interaction, Barcelona, Spain, Dec. 2016.
[10] M. Kaspar, J. D. Muñoz Osorio, and J. Bock, “Sim2Real Transfer
for Reinforcement Learning Without Dynamics Randomization,” in
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS). Las Vegas, NV, USA: IEEE, Oct. 2020, pp. 4383–4388.
[11] F. Muratore, F. Ramos, G. Turk, W. Yu, M. Gienger, and J. Peters,
“Robot Learning from Randomized Simulations: A Review,” Frontiers
in Robotics and AI, vol. 9, no. 799893, Apr. 2022.
[12] J. Josifovski, M. Kerzel, C. Pregizer, L. Posniak, and S. Wermter,
“Object Detection and Pose Estimation Based on Convolutional Neural
Networks Trained with Synthetic Data,” in IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), Madrid, Spain,
Oct. 2018, pp. 6269–6276.
[13] X. B. Peng, M. Andrychowicz, W. Zaremba, and P. Abbeel, “Sim-toReal Transfer of Robotic Control with Dynamics Randomization,” in
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
Brisbane, QLD, Australia, 2018, pp. 3803–3810, iSSN: 2577-087X.
[14] OpenAI, I. Akkaya, M. Andrychowicz, M. Chociej, M. Litwin,
B. McGrew, A. Petron, A. Paino, M. Plappert, G. Powell, R. Ribas,
J. Schneider, N. Tezak, J. Tworek, P. Welinder, L. Weng, Q. Yuan,
W. Zaremba, and L. Zhang, “Solving Rubik’s Cube with a Robot
Hand, Tech. Rep. arXiv:1910.07113, Oct. 2019.
[15] B. Mehta, M. Diaz, F. Golemo, C. J. Pal, and L. Paull, “Active Domain
Randomization,” in Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), vol. 100.
Osaka, Japan: PMLR, May 2020, pp. 1162–1176.
[16] F. Ramos, R. Possas, and D. Fox, “BayesSim: Adaptive Domain
Randomization Via Probabilistic Inference for Robotics Simulators,”
in Robotics: Science and Systems (R:SS), vol. 15, June 2019.

[17] F. Muratore, T. Gruner, F. Wiese, B. Belousov, M. Gienger, and
J. Peters, “Neural Posterior Domain Randomization,” in Conference
on Robot Learning (CoRL), vol. 164. PMLR, Nov. 2021, pp. 1532–
1542.
[18] P. Huang, X. Zhang, Z. Cao, S. Liu, M. Xu, W. Ding, J. Francis,
B. Chen, and D. Zhao, “What Went Wrong? Closing the Sim-to-Real
Gap Via Differentiable Causal Discovery,” in Conference on Robot
Learning (CoRL), Atlanta, GA, USA, Aug. 2023.
[19] G. Tiboni, K. Arndt, and V. Kyrki, “DROPO: Sim-to-Real Transfer
with Offline Domain Randomization,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 166, p. 104432, Aug. 2023.
[20] P. Schöpf, S. Auddy, J. Hollenstein, and A. Rodrı́guez-Sánchez,
“Hypernetwork-PPO for Continual Reinforcement Learning,” in Deep
Reinforcement Learning Workshop NeurIPS 2022, Dec. 2022.
[21] S. Auddy, J. Hollenstein, M. Saveriano, A. Rodrı́guez-Sánchez, and
J. Piater, “Continual Learning from Demonstration of Robotics Skills,”
Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 165, p. 104427, 2023.
[22] ——, “Scalable and Efficient Continual Learning from Demonstration
Via a Hypernetwork-Generated Stable Dynamics Model, Tech. Rep.
arXiv:2311.03600, Jan. 2024, eprint: 2311.03600.
[23] K. Khetarpal, M. Riemer, I. Rish, and D. Precup, “Towards Continual
Reinforcement Learning: A Review and Perspectives,” Journal of
Artificial Intelligence Research, vol. 75, pp. 1401–1476, Dec. 2022.
[24] Y. Luo, Y. Wang, K. Dong, Q. Zhang, E. Cheng, Z. Sun, and
B. Song, “Relay Hindsight Experience Replay: Self-Guided Continual
Reinforcement Learning for Sequential Object Manipulation Tasks
with Sparse Rewards,” Neurocomputing, vol. 557, p. 126620, Nov.
2023.
[25] J. Josifovski, M. Malmir, N. Klarmann, and A. Knoll, “Continual
Learning on Incremental Simulations for Real-World Robotic Manipulation Tasks,” in 2nd R:SS Workshop on Closing the Reality Gap in
Sim2Real Transfer for Robotics, Corvallis, OR, USA, July 2020, p. 3.
[26] A. A. Rusu, N. C. Rabinowitz, G. Desjardins, H. Soyer, J. Kirkpatrick,
K. Kavukcuoglu, R. Pascanu, and R. Hadsell, “Progressive Neural
Networks, Tech. Rep. arXiv:1606.04671, Oct. 2016.
[27] A. A. Rusu, M. Večerı́k, T. Rothörl, N. Heess, R. Pascanu, and
R. Hadsell, “Sim-to-Real Robot Learning from Pixels with Progressive
Nets,” in Annual Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL), vol. 78.
Mountain View, CA, USA: PMLR, 2017, pp. 262–270, iSSN: 26403498.
[28] A. A. Rusu, S. G. Colmenarejo, C. Gulcehre, G. Desjardins, J. Kirkpatrick, R. Pascanu, V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, and R. Hadsell, “Policy
Distillation,” in International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR). San Juan, Puerto Rico: arXiv, May 2016, eprint: 1511.06295.
[29] R. Traoré, H. Caselles-Dupré, T. Lesort, T. Sun, N. Dı́az-Rodrı́guez,
and D. Filliat, “Continual Reinforcement Learning Deployed in RealLife Using Policy Distillation and Sim2real Transfer,” in ICML Workshop on Multi-Task and Lifelong Learning. arXiv, June 2019.
[30] S. Kessler, J. Parker-Holder, P. Ball, S. Zohren, and S. J. Roberts,
“UNCLEAR: A Straightforward Method for Continual Reinforcement
Learning,” in ICML Workshop on Continual Learning, vol. 108.
Vienna, Austria: PMLR, 2020.
[31] A. Gaurav, “Safety-Oriented Stability Biases for Continual Learning,”
Master’s thesis, University of Waterloo, 2020.
[32] “Robotiq Gripper.” [Online]. Available: http://robotiq.com/products/
industrial-robot-hand/
[33] P. Varin, L. Grossman, and S. Kuindersma, “A Comparison of Action
Spaces for Learning Manipulation Tasks,” in IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), Macau,China,
2019, pp. 6015–6021.
[34] Y. R. Stürz, L. M. Affolter, and R. S. Smith, “Parameter Identification
of the KUKA LBR iiwa Robot Including Constraints on Physical
Feasibility,” IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 6863–6868, 2017.
[35] S. Edwards and C. Lewis, “ROS-Industrial — Applying the Robot
Operating System (ROS) to Industrial Applications,” in ECHORD
Workshop at the IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), St. Paul, MN, USA, 2012.
[36] C. Hennersperger, B. Fuerst, S. Virga, O. Zettinig, B. Frisch, T. Neff,
and N. Navab, “Towards MRI-Based Autonomous Robotic Us Acquisitions: A First Feasibility Study,” IEEE Transactions on Medical
Imaging, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 538–548, Feb. 2017.
[37] M. Quigley, B. Gerkey, K. Conley, J. Faust, T. Foote, J. Leibs,
E. Berger, R. Wheeler, and A. Ng, “ROS: An Open-Source Robot
Operating System,” in ICRA Workshop on Open Source Software,
vol. 3, 2009, p. 6.

[38] A. Hill, A. Raffin, M. Ernestus, A. Gleave, A. Kanervisto, R. Traore,
P. Dhariwal, C. Hesse, O. Klimov, A. Nichol, M. Plappert, A. Radford,
J. Schulman, S. Sidor, and Y. Wu, “Stable Baselines,” 2018.
[39] A. Raffin, J. Kober, and F. Stulp, “Smooth Exploration for Robotic
Reinforcement Learning,” in Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL),
vol. 164. London, UK: PMLR, Jan. 2022, pp. 1634–1644.
[40] M. Malmir, J. Josifovski, N. Klarmann, and A. Knoll, “DiAReL: Reinforcement Learning with Disturbance Awareness for Robust Sim2Real
Policy Transfer in Robot Control, Tech. Rep. arXiv:2306.09010, 2023.
[41] Y. Kadokawa, L. Zhu, Y. Tsurumine, and T. Matsubara, “Cyclic policy
distillation: Sample-efficient sim-to-real reinforcement learning with
domain randomization,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems, vol. 165,
p. 104425, 2023.

