Jacob Vaught
Columbia, SC | (803) 645-9962 | jvaught@sc.edu
EDUCATION
University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 	Anticipated Graduation: May 2025

Bachelor of Science in Mechanical Engineering
Major GPA: 3.71
Bachelor of Science in Electrical Engineering 
Bachelor of Science in Computer Engineering
Made Dean’s List Twice 
Major GPA: 3.58
Major GPA: 4.00
Overall GPA: 3.59
SC Palmetto Fellows, Dean’s Scholar, USC STEM Supplement 

Midlands Technical College, Columbia, SC 	January 2019 - May 2021
Certificate in Engineering Sciences 	Overall GPA: 3.89
Dean’s List Spring 2021, Fall 2020
President’s List Spring 2020, Summer 2020, Graduated with High Honors: Magna Cum Laude 
Work Experience	

Westinghouse Electric Company LLC.
Summer Intern 
Hopkins, SC
May 2022 – August 2022
	•	
	•	Used CAD to model parts to prevent lateral movement of torque testing rig, which could result in a slightly less accurate result.
	•	Researched methodology for tensile tube testing and found a suitable ASTM standard.
	•	Developed multiple Python3 programs to do a simple data analysis on grid growth in nuclear fuel assemblies.
	•	Used CAD to calculate POSITY(Porosity) of Combustion Engineering™ Grid Straps
CLASSROOM EXPERIENCE

Dr. Lang Yuan’s Research Laboratory
Undergraduate Research Student
Columbia, SC
August 2021-Present
	•	Develop FEA models for Laser Powder Bed Fusion Additive Manufacturing (LPBFAM).
	•	Use and modify professor’s models to predict distortion in LPBFAM with a variety of parameters.
	•	Use ABAQUS, a finite element analysis software, to produce distortion models.
	•	Review research articles to understand the theory behind lab topics.

Dr. Austin Downey’s Research Laboratory (ARTS Lab) 
Undergraduate Research Student
Columbia, SC
February 2022-Present
	•	Develop FEA models for use in vibration analysis of complex structures.
	•	Worked to switch team from Abaqus to Code-Aster, an open-source alternative.
	•	Used CAD to model multiple items.
	•	Worked with TensorFlow to create a simple AI

EMCH 290(Thermodynamics) Teacher’s Assistant
Columbia, SC
Teacher Assistant for Dr. Azadeh Sepahvandi
August 2022-Present
	•	Updated PowerPoint slides to use more aesthetic design cues and include more topics from textbook
	•	Developed all Homework and Quizzes for the class and developed solutions manuals.
	•	Graded all student submitted work within 1 week of submission.
leadership EXPERIENCE

American Society of Mechanical Engineers
Secretary 
Columbia, SC
February 2022 – Present
	•	
	•	Scheduled Rooms for meetings and recorded noted
	•	Responded to emails from Faculty and companies
	•	Oversaw first major remodeling of ASME lounge room since 2005
	•	Designed CAD models for the Tiger Burn and ran FEA analysis on it.
	•	Developed 3D printed parts to demonstrate the structural integrity of the structure.

Unofficial Peer Mentor
Tutor
Columbia, SC
August 2020 – Present
	•	
	•	Provided guidance and aided peers in classroom and informal settings
	•	Tutor those who struggled with class material by drawing on own knowledge of subjects to clarify and assist others when possible.
	•	Assisted peers in a wide variety of programming and other Class-related problems. 
Projects

LPBFAM Distortion Prediction Improvement 
May 2022-August 2022
	•	
	•	Modified Dr. Lang’s current software for Distortion simulation to allow for quadrant sectioning compared to the older method of simulating LPBFAM layer by layer. 
	•	Presented at Findings at Undergraduate Summer Research Symposium

Java Chess Simulation
July 2021
	•	
	•	Developed A Chess Game simulation with Java, and modified the design through multiple iterations to match current Graphical Interface standards in Microsoft Windows   
	•	Was able to achieve a networking functionality between 2 computers on the same network, However, the user did have to know the IP address of the other computer.
	•	Could swiftly and accurately predict player moves one step ahead

ASME Tiger Burn
Fall 2021 & 2022
	•	
	•	Built a large wood structure for use in the annual Tiger Burn. Analyzed the structure and determined the size of the wood to use for each piece of the structure.
	•	Guided and instructed peers on how to construct the structure. Helped design the Structure with Creo Parametric and predetermined the angle of cuts used in each piece of the structure.
	•	Learned how to proficiently use a Miter Saw with Dual Bevel

Vinyl Record Player 
June 2020
	•	
	•	Produced a Record Player after a week of planning and designing. It was produced with a wood material to create a vintage style and used a 5V USB port to power it.
	•	Had Stereo Sound and used a general-purpose needle for sound. The conductor for audio was a lower quality wire, however, the amplifier was able to filter out most sound discrepancies. 
	•	Used two 1-inch tweeters for sound and used a simple DC motor for rotating the turn table at a constant speed. The Motor speed was controlled with a low-cost general Pulse Width Modulation device. 
Relevant courses
General:

Calculus 1, 2, 3 & Diff. EQ.
English 1 & 2
Chemistry 1 & 2
Physics 1 & 2
Statistics for Engineers


Mechanical:

Kinematics
Mechatronics
Mechanical Laboratory 1
Finite Element Analysis
Computer-Aided Design 
Statics and Dynamics 
Solid Mechanics
Thermodynamics
Applied Numerical Methods
Machine Design


Electrical:

DC Circuits
AC Circuits 1 & 2
Electrical Lab 1
Electromagnetics
Microelectronics
UNIX/Linux
Digital Logic Design
Computer Architecture
Algorithmic Design 1 & 2

SKILLS
General:

Microsoft Office Suite
Problem Solving 
Google Suite
CAD
FEA
Additive Manufacturing
Circuit Analysis
Independent Research
Programming

Mechanical:

AutoCAD
AutoDesk Inventor
TinkerCAD
SOLIDWORKS
Creo
Abaqus
Code-Aster
Arduino IDE


Electrical:

LT-Spice
MATLAB
Python
Java
Logisim
Mars-MIPS(Assembly)

