Jacob Vaught
Columbia, SC | (803) 645-9962 | jvaught@sc.edu
EDUCATION
University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 	Anticipated Graduation: May 2025
Bachelor of Science in Mechanical Engineering
Major GPA: 3.7
Bachelor of Science in Electrical Engineering 
Bachelor of Science in Computer Engineering
Dean’s List 2x, SC Palmetto Fellows, Dean’s Scholar, USC STEM Supplement, Pi Tau Sigma, Rocketry Club, ASME, SAMPE, AIAA, IEEE
Major GPA: 3.5
Major GPA: 4.0
Overall GPA: 3.59
Midlands Technical College, Columbia, SC 	January 2019 - May 2021
Certificate in Engineering Sciences 	Overall GPA: 3.89
Dean’s List 2x, President’s List 2x, Graduated with High Honors: Magna Cum Laude 
Work Experience	

Westinghouse Electric Company LLC.
Summer Intern 
Hopkins, SC
May 2022 – August 2022
	•	
	•	Used CAD to model parts to prevent lateral movement of torque testing rig, which resulted in a more accurate result
	•	Researched methodology for tensile tube testing and found a suitable ASTM standard
	•	Developed 4 Python programs to do a data analysis on grid growth in nuclear fuel assemblies
	•	Used CAD(SOLIDWORKS) to calculate POSITY(Porosity) of Combustion Engineering™ Grid Straps

Dr. Lang Yuan’s Research Laboratory (McNair Aerospace Center)
Undergraduate Research Student
Columbia, SC
August 2021-Present
	•	Develop FEA models for Laser Powder Bed Fusion Additive Manufacturing (LPBFAM)
	•	Use and modify professor’s models to predict distortion in LPBFAM with approximately 50 parameters
	•	Use ABAQUS, a finite element analysis software, to produce approximately 10 FEA distortion models
	•	Review research articles to understand the theory behind lab topics
Dr. Austin Downey’s Research Laboratory (ARTS Lab) 
Undergraduate Research Student
Columbia, SC
February 2022-Present
	•	Develop FEA models for use in vibration analysis of complex structures
	•	Working to switch team of 10 from Abaqus to Code-Aster, an open-source alternative
	•	Working to get a real time updating FEA model running on a RTOS (Real Time Operating System)
	•	Use FPGA to generate and read a 30 MHz signal.
EMCH 290(Thermodynamics) Teacher’s Assistant
Columbia, SC
Teacher Assistant for Dr. Azadeh Sepahvandi
August 2022-Present
	•	Update PowerPoint slides to use more aesthetic design cues and include more topics from textbook
	•	Develop 6 assignments and 6 quizzes for the class and develop solutions manuals
	•	Grade approximately 30 students’ submitted work, including tests, within 1 week of submission.
leadership EXPERIENCE

American Society of Mechanical Engineers
Secretary 
Columbia, SC
February 2022 – Present
	•	
	•	Schedule rooms for bi-weekly meetings, recorded notes, and responded to emails from faculty and companies
	•	Oversaw first major remodeling of ASME lounge room since 2005
	•	Design CAD models for the Tiger Burn and ran FEA analysis on it and develop a physical, to-scale model
Society for Advancement of Materials and Process Engineering
Secretary
Columbia, SC
August 2020 – Present
	•	
	•	Scheduled Rooms for meetings
	•	Advertised meetings 
	•	Assisted with annual Beam competition
Projects

LPBFAM Distortion Prediction Improvement 
May 2022-August 2022
	•	
	•	Modified Dr. Lang’s current software for Distortion simulation to allow for quadrant sectioning compared to the older method of simulating LPBFAM layer by layer. 
	•	Presented findings at Undergraduate Summer Research Symposium


Java Chess Simulation
July 2021
	•	
	•	Developed a chess game simulation with Java, and modified the design through multiple iterations to match current Graphical Interface standards in Microsoft Windows   
	•	Achieved a networking functionality between 2 computers on the same network
	•	Accomplished the ability to have the program swiftly and accurately predict player moves one step ahead

ASME Tiger Burn
Fall 2021 & 2022
	•	
	•	Built a large wood structure for use in the annual Tiger Burn. Used FEA to complete a structural analysis on the structure and determined most effective cuts for the wood to use in the structure.
	•	Guided and instructed peers on how to construct the structure. Designed the structure with Creo Parametric.
	•	Taught peers how to proficiently use power tools, including Miter saw, Jigsaw, and electric drill

Vinyl Record Player 
June 2020
	•	
	•	Produced a record player after a week of planning and designing. It was produced with a wood material to create a vintage style and used a 5V USB port to power it.
	•	Had stereo sound and used a general-purpose needle for sound. The conductor for audio was a lower quality wire, however, the amplifier was able to filter out most sound discrepancies. 
	•	Used two 1-inch tweeters for sound and used a brushed DC motor for rotating the turn table at a constant speed. The motor speed was controlled with a Pulse Width Modulation (PWM) device. 
Relevant courses
General:

Calculus 1, 2, 3 & Diff. EQ.
English 1 & 2
Chemistry 1 & 2
Physics 1 & 2
Statistics for Engineers


Mechanical:

Kinematics
Mechatronics
Mechanical Laboratory 1
Finite Element Analysis
Computer-Aided Design 
Statics and Dynamics 
Solid Mechanics
Thermodynamics
Applied Numerical Methods
Machine Design



Electrical:

DC Circuits
AC Circuits 1 & 2
Electrical Lab 1
Electromagnetics
Microelectronics
UNIX/Linux
Digital Logic Design
Computer Architecture
Algorithmic Design 1 & 2

SKILLS
General:

Microsoft Office Suite
Problem Solving 
Google Suite
CAD
FEA
Additive Manufacturing
Circuit Analysis
Independent Research
Programming

Mechanical:

AutoCAD
AutoDesk Inventor
TinkerCAD
SOLIDWORKS
Creo
Abaqus
Code-Aster
Arduino IDE


Electrical:

LT-Spice
MATLAB
Python
Java
Logisim (Digital Logic Design)
Mars-MIPS(Assembly)
Oscilloscope
Function generator

