Prompt:

Please write a short a essay describing your interest in the field of space transportation. You may include information about past projects, future plans, or anything you feel would demonstrate an interest in this field. (MAX 500 words)

DRAFT OUTLINE

1.  Personal Interest in Space Transportation

2.  Background and Education

3.  Projects and Practical Experience

4.  Future Plans and Aspirations

ROUGH DRAFT #1

Why am I fascinated in space travel? Ender’s Game book

As a child reading this book gifted to me by an elder brother was what got me fascinated with space travel. Imagining being in space, floating in zero-gravity was fascinating. [Add something in here to explain why I care about space transportation from the Ender Game book]. I personally believe that for humanity to survive in the long term, becoming an inter-planetary species is required(of course in addition to many other advancements). beyond my childhood fantasies of being in space, I believe this is truly what humanity will need in the long term, perhaps as many have called it, the Final frontier.

As I transitioned into high school, I began to build model rockets, and also became fascinated with drones. Since the only Aerospace program in the state I lived in was at USC, I planned to go there, but due to financial conditions, I opted to instead attend my local community college and started a dual degree in Mechanical and electrical Engineering to combine my passion for mechanical and electronic aspect of rockets and drone controls

Once I had finished 2 years at the community college, I transferred into the USC engineering program. I joined the local AIAA section and vied for the secretary position, not receiving it initially, but received it 2 semesters later. I also began to make friends within the aerospace circle and co-found the USC rocketry club. As I progressed in my courses, I also began to search for research opportunities, eventually settling on metal additive manufacturing, which can be used to produce complex geometries (making lighter parts) for aerospace applications. I also began exploring communication methods for deep space travel, leading me to partner with a professor in the EE department to study additively manufactured antennas that can conform to non-standard geometries. I was able to utilize course in fluid dynamics, solid mechanics, machine design, wireless communications, algorithm design, and one of my favorites: Control systems theory

Doing inter-disciplinary research(including civil engineering stuff with wireless transmission estimation of structure state) has really broadened my perspective on the combination of these fields as a whole. My additive manufacturing work has enhanced my understanding of material science and some of the issues surrounding the development of aircraft and space craft, and working with the carbon fiber group(not in the group, but working in the lab next to them) has also allowed me to see a lot of the progress made there, yet still also see many of the issues regarding using them in commercial space flight due to their weak compressive nature

Once I complete my Bachelor’s degree, I plan to pursue a Electrical Engineering Doctoral degree at USC with a focus on applications for space transportation and communication. Although an nontraditional application of this work to the field, I believe this will become crucial in the future for space travel, and also for the human race while we are still isolated on this pale blue dot in the vast expanse. I also plan to continue working with my additive manufacturing professors to help integrate communications into space vessels without increasing weight, and ensuring reliability oif future space craft.

DRAFT #2

My fascination with space travel began in childhood, formed by the pages of "Ender’s Game," a book gifted from my elder brother. The book’s vivid depiction of space and the concept of zero-gravity not only captivated my imagination but also planted the seed for my future obsession with space travel. As my understanding of space travel evolved, I developed a conviction that for the enduring survival of humanity, it is imperative to become an inter-planetary species. This belief, going beyond the fantasies of my youth, has continued to steer me towards the realm of space transportation. I view this field as potentially the ultimate frontier for human exploration and survival.

In high school, my passion for space and the extraterrestrial landscape found a tangible outlet in model rocketry and an interest in drones. I had aspirations to join the only Aerospace program in the state, at USC, however financial constraints steered me to the local community college. Here, I began a dual degree in Mechanical and Electrical Engineering, a blend perfectly suited to delve into the mechanics and electronics of rockets and drones. After two years at community college, I was able to transfer to the USC engineering program. Here I began my involvement with the student chapter of AIAA, and eventually stepped up for a leadership role. It was here, amidst peers with shared interests in space, that I co-founded the USC Rocketry Club.

My academic journey was further enriched by research opportunities in metal additive manufacturing, exploring its potential to create lighter, more complex geometries for aerospace applications. Later, collaborating with a professor in the Electrical Engineering department, I used prior research experience to investigate additive manufacturing methods for antennas with the flexibility to conform to non-standard geometries. My foray into communication methods for deep space travel was a significant pivot. My interdisciplinary research journey, including explorations into civil engineering using wireless transmission to estimate the state of structures, has broadened my perspective on the power of inter-disciplinary efforts. While working alongside the carbon fiber group in my manufacturing research group, I've witnessed the advancements and challenges in using these materials in commercial space flight, particularly their limitations under compressive stress. These ventures allowed me to utilize and apply knowledge from courses such as solid mechanics, wireless communications, algorithm design, and my personal favorite class, control systems theory.

Looking to the future, with my bachelor’s degree completion on the horizon, I plan to begin a Doctoral degree in Electrical Engineering at USC, with a focus on applications for space transportation and communication. This application in the field is a frontier I am eager to explore, believing it will become vital for future space travel and the broader human endeavor in space. I believe my journey, from the pages of a science fiction novel to the cusp of groundbreaking research, is a testament to the power of interdisciplinary engineering education.
